60                  MEANS OF COMMUNICATION.
most part a fine agricultural country in Whitman and Stevens Counties, W. T., and also richly timbered and mining region in Kootenai County, Idaho, rendering them available to settlers and industrial enterprise.
2. Pacific Division of the same railroad, extending from Kalama, on the Columbia river, to Tacoma, on Puget Sound, (1(:5 miles), with a branch line (30 miles) to the coal regions of Wilkeson and Carbonado. This road passes through a most interesting pirt of Washington Territory.
3. A short narrow gauge railroad from Olympia to Tenino, on the line of the Pacific Division of the Northern Pacific Railroad.
4. The Oregon and California Railroad (East Side Division), from East Portland to Roseburg, in the Umpqua Valley, a distance of two hundred miles. The road follows the east side bf the Willamette and touches all the principal towns in the valley. Its extension to the California line is now in progress. From Roseburg a well managed stage line runs to Redding, in the Sacramento Valley (180 miles), the present northern terminus of the California railroad system.
5. The Oregon and California Railroad (West Side Division), beginning at Portland, within the city limits, and following the west side of the Willamette river. Passing westwardly through Washington County, it then turns to the south and ends at Corvallis (97 miles). This line.will be extended to Junction City, some miles further, to unite with the Oregon and California Railroad, and eventually, also, in a northwest direction to Astoria, at the mouth of the Columbia river.
6. The Oregon Railway Company, limited, a narrow gauge road, also traverses the most fertile lands of the Willamette Valley, on both sides of the river. This line flanks the Oregon and California Railroad.  It begins at Coburg 120 miles from Portland, on the east side of the river and skirts the foot hills, running north until it approaches Ray's Landing. It continues its course on the west side of the valley, running south to Airlie, a distance of 37 miles, with a branch of 7 miles to Sheridan. This line has been leased to the Oregon Railway and Navigation Company.
7. Tle Oregon Railway and Navigation Company's Railroad.  A standard gauge line, fully equipped, running from Portland mainly through the valley ot the Columbia river, by way of The Dalles, to Wallula, thence to Walla Walla and Dayton, with a branch from Bolles' Junction to Texas Ferry, on the Snake river. There is also a narrow-gauge branch from Whitman, near Walla Walla, to Blue Mountain Station, near Weston, in Oregon.
8. The ocean steamship lines of the same company, being a fleet of first-class passenger and freight steamships, making regular trips every five days between San Francisco and Portland, as well as forming a line between San Francisco, British Columbia, the ports on Puget Sound and Alaska.
9. A fleet of 30 river steamboats and barges, plying daily on the Lower, Middle and Upper Columbia and Snake and Willamette rivers, traversing the last named river to the head of its navigable waters; together with the steamboats and facilities formerly owned by the Willamette Locks and Transportation Company.
10. The fleet of four new iron steam colliers, comprising the Mississippi, the Umatilla, the Willamette and the Walla Walla, which make frequent trips between Seattle and San Francisco.
Appended are the routes of travel which now radiate from Portland, with the mileage in operation:



