clue/graph-composer
Graph visualization for your project's and its dependencies:
Table of contents
Usage
graph-composer show
graph-composer export
Install
As a phar (recommended)
Installation using Composer
Development
Tests
License
Usage
Once clue/graph-composer is installed, you can use it via command line like this.
graph-composer show
The command creates a dependency graph for the given project path and opens
the default desktop image viewer for you:
It accepts an optional argument which is the path to your project directory or composer.json file
(defaults to checking the current directory for a composer.json file).
You may optionally pass an option to set
the image type (defaults to ).
graph-composer export
The command works very much like the command, but instead of opening your
default image viewer, it will write the resulting graph to STDOUT or into an image file:
It accepts an optional argument which is the path to your project directory or composer.json file
(defaults to checking the current directory for a composer.json file).
It accepts an additional optional argument which is the path to write the resulting image to.
Its file extension
also sets the image format (unless you also explicitly pass the option). Example call:
If this argument is not given, it defaults to writing to STDOUT, which may
be useful for scripting purposes:
You may optionally pass an option to set
the image type (defaults to ).
Install
You can grab a copy of clue/graph-composer in either of the following ways.
This project aims to run on any platform and thus does not require any PHP
extensions and supports running on legacy PHP 5.3 through current PHP 8+.
It's highly recommended to use the latest supported PHP version for this project.
The graph drawing feature is powered by the excellent GraphViz
software. This means you'll have to install GraphViz ( executable).
The Graphviz homepage includes complete
installation instructions for most common platforms, users of Debian/Ubuntu-based
distributions may simply invoke:
As a phar (recommended)
Once you have PHP and GraphViz installed, you can simply download a pre-packaged
and ready-to-use version of this project as a Phar to any directory.
You can simply download the latest file from our
releases page.
The latest release can
always be downloaded like this:
That's it already. Once downloaded, you can verify everything works by running this:
If you prefer a global (system-wide) installation without having to type the extension
each time, you may simply invoke:
You can verify everything works by running:
There's no separate procedure, simply download the latest release again
and overwrite the existing phar.
Installation using Composer
Alternatively, you can also install clue/graph-composer as part of your development dependencies.
You will likely want to use the section to exclude clue/graph-composer in your production environment.
This method also requires PHP 5.3+, GraphViz and, of course, Composer.
You can either modify your manually or run the following command to include the latest tagged release:
Now you should be able to invoke the following command in your project root:
Alternatively, you can install this globally for your user by running:
Now, assuming you have in your path, you can invoke the following command:
Note: You should only invoke and rely on the main graph-composer bin file.
Installing this project as a non-dev dependency in order to use its
source code as a library is not supported.
To update to the latest release, just run .
If you installed it globally via composer you can run instead.
Development
clue/graph-composer is an open-source project and encourages everybody to
participate in its development.
You're interested in checking out how clue/graph-composer works under the hood and/or want
to contribute to the development of clue/graph-composer?
Then this section is for you!
The recommended way to install clue/graph-composer is to clone (or download) this repository
and use Composer to download its dependencies.
Therefore you'll need PHP, Composer, GraphViz, git and curl installed.
For example, on a recent Ubuntu/debian system, simply run:
You can now verify everything works by running clue/graph-composer like this:
If you want to distribute clue/graph-composer as a single standalone release file, you may
compile the project into a single file like this:
Note that compiling will temporarily install a copy of this project to the
local directory and install all non-development dependencies
for distribution. This should only take a second or two if you've previously
installed its dependencies already.
The build script optionally accepts the version number ( env) and
an output file name or will otherwise try to look up the last release tag,
such as .
You can now verify the resulting file works by running it
like this:
To update your development version to the latest version, just run this:
Made some changes to your local development version?
Make sure to let the world know! :shipit:
We welcome PRs and would love to hear from you!
Happy hacking!
Tests
To run the test suite, you first need to clone this repo and then install all
dependencies through Composer:
To run the test suite, go to the project root and run:
License
This project is released under the permissive MIT license.
Did you know that I offer custom development services and issuing invoices for
sponsorships of releases and for contributions? Contact me (@clue) for details.
