Deep Reinforcement Learning Toolkit for Cryptocurrencies
Table of contents:
1. Purpose
2. Scope
3. Dependencies
4. Project structure
5. Design patterns
6. Getting started
7. Citing this project
8. Appendix
1. Purpose
The purpose of this application is to provide a toolkit to:
- Record full limit order book and trade tick data from two
exchanges (Coinbase Pro and Bitfinex) into an Arctic
Tickstore database (i.e., MongoDB),
- Replay recorded historical data to derive feature sets for training
- Train an agent to trade cryptocurrencies using the DQN algorithm (note: this agent
implementation is intended to be an example for users to reference)
2. Scope
- Research only: there is no capability for live-trading at exchanges.
- Reproducing RL paper results: the dataset used for this article is available on Kaggle Datasets.
3. Dependencies
See
Note: to run and train the DQN Agent ( ) tensorflow and Keras-RL
need to be installed manually and are not listed in the
in order to keep this project compatible with other open
sourced reinforcement learning platforms
(e.g., OpenAI Baselines).
Pip install the following:
4. Project Structure
The key elements in this project and brief descriptions.
5. Design Patterns
Refer to each individual module for design pattern specifications:
- Limit Order Book, Data Recorder, and Database
- Stationary LOB Features
- POMDP Environment
- Learning Algorithms and Neural Networks
Sample snapshot of Limit Order Book levels:
Sample snapshot of Order Arrival flow metrics:
6. Getting Started
Install the project on your machine:
6.1 Record limit order book data from exchanges
Step 1:
Go to the and define the crypto currencies which
you would like to subscribe and record.
Note: basket list format is as follows
Step 2:
Open a CLI/terminal and execute the command to start recording
full limit order book and trade data.
6.2 Replay recorded data to export stationary feature set
Step 1:
Ensure that you have data in your database.
Check with MongoDB shell or Compass.
If you do not have data, see refer to the section above
6.1 Record limit order book data from exchanges.
Step 2:
Run a historial data simulation to take snapshots of the
limit order book(s) and export their stationary features
to a compressed csv.
To do this, you can leverage the test cases in
or write your own logic. When using the test case methods, make sure
to change the query parameters to match what you've actually recorded and
is in your database.
Example to export features to a compressed csv:
6.3 Train an agent
Step 1:
Ensure you have data in the folder.
This is where the agent loads data from. If you do not have data exported
into that folder, see refer to the section above
6.2 Replay recorded data to export stationary feature set.
Step 2:
Open a CLI/terminal and start learning/training the agent.
Refer to to see all the keyword arguments.
7. Citing this project
Please remember to cite this repository if used in your research:
8. Appendix
8.1 Branches
There are multiple branches of this project, each with a different implementation pattern
for persisting data:
- FULL branch is intended to be the foundation for a fully automated trading system
(i.e., implementation of design patterns that are ideal for a trading system that requires
parallel processing) and persists streaming tick data into an Arctic Tick Store
Note: the branches below (i.e., lightweight, order book snapshot, mongo integration)
are no longer actively maintained as of October 2018, and are here for reference.
- LIGHT WEIGHT branch is intended to record streaming data more efficiently than
the full branch (i.e., all websocket connections are made from a single process
and the limit order book is not maintained) and persists streaming tick data into
an Arctic tick store
- ORDER BOOK SNAPSHOT branch has the same design pattern as the full branch,
but instead of recording streaming ticks, snapshots of the limit order book are taken
every N seconds and persisted into an Arctic tick store
- MONGO INTEGRATION branch is the same implementation as ORDER BOOK SNAPSHOT,
with the difference being a standard MongoDB is used, rather than Arctic.
This branch was originally used to benchmark Arctic's performance and is not up to
date with the FULL branch.
8.2 Assumptions
- You have installed a virtual environment and installed the project to that venv
(e.g., )
- You have mongoDB already installed
- You know how to use a cli to start python scripts
- You are running an ubuntu 18+ os
8.3 Change Log
- 2021-09-25: Updated : going forward the database requires a manual
installation via
- 2019-12-12: Added docstrings and refactored many classes to improve code readability
- 2019-09-18: Refactored s and s for simplification and
added different approaches.
- 2019-09-13: Created and implemented 'order arrival' flow metrics,
inspired by
Multi-Level Order-Flow Imbalance in a Limit Order Book
by Xu, Ke; Gould, Martin D.; Howison, Sam D.
- 2019-09-06: Created and implemented base class
- 2019-04-28: Reorganized project structure for simplicity
