<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file --
tidylog
![CRAN
Version](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=tidylog)
![Coverage
status](https://codecov.io/github/elbersb/tidylog?branch=master)
The goal of tidylog is to provide feedback about dplyr and tidyr
operations. It provides simple wrapper functions for almost all dplyr
and tidyr functions, such as , , , ,
and .
Example
Load after and/or :
Tidylog will give you feedback, for instance when filtering a data frame
or adding a new variable:
Tidylog reports detailed information for joins:
In this case, we see that 1,556 rows from the dataset do not
have weather information.
Tidylog can be especially helpful in longer pipes:
Here, it might have been accidental that the last command had
no effect.
Installation
Download from CRAN:
Or install the development version:
Benchmarks
Tidylog will add a small overhead to each function call. This can be
relevant for very large datasets and especially for joins. If you want
to switch off tidylog for a single long-running command, simply prefix
or , such as in . See this
vignette
for more information.
More examples
filter, distinct, drop\na
mutate, transmute, replace\na, fill
joins
For joins, tidylog provides more detailed information. For any join,
tidylog will show the number of rows that are only present in x (the
first dataframe), only present in y (the second dataframe), and rows
that have been matched. Numbers in parentheses indicate that these rows
are not included in the result. Tidylog will also indicate whether any
rows were duplicated (which is often unintentional):
More examples:
Because tidylog needs to perform two additional joins behind the scenes
to report this information, the overhead will be larger than for the
other tidylog functions (especially with large datasets).
select, relocate, rename
summarize
tally, count, add\tally, add\count
pivot\longer, pivot\wider
Tidylog also supports and .
Turning logging off, registering additional loggers
To turn off the output for just a particular function call, you can
simply call the dplyr and tidyr functions directly, e.g.
or .
To turn off the output more permanently, set the global option
to an empty list:
This option can also be used to register additional loggers. The option
expects a list of functions. By default (when
is set to NULL), tidylog will use the
function to display the output, but if you prefer a more colorful
output, simply overwrite the option:
To print the output both to the screen and to a file, you could use:
Namespace conflicts
Tidylog redefines several of the functions exported by dplyr and tidyr,
so it should be loaded last, otherwise there will be no output. A more
explicit way to resolve namespace conflicts is to use the
conflicted package:
