Deep Clojure/Python Integration
Version Info
New Versions Are HOT! Huge New Features! You Can't Afford To Miss Out!
API Documentation
Java API - you can use libpython-clj from java - no
Clojure required. The class is included with the jar so just put the jar on the classpath and then
will work. Be sure to carefully read the namespace doc as, due to performance considerations, not all methods are
protected via automatic GIL management. Note this integration includes support for extremely efficient data copies to numpy objects
and callbacks from python to java.
make-fastcallable so if you
calling a small function repeatedly you can now call it about twice as fast. A better optimization is to call
a function once with numpy array arguments but unfortunately not all use cases are amenable to this pathway. So we
did what we can.
JDK-17 and Mac M-1 support. To use libpython-clj2 with jdk-17 you need to enable the foreign module -
see deps.edn
for a working alias.
You can now Embed Clojure in Python - you can launch a Clojure REPL from a Python host process.
32 bit support!!
20-30% better performance.
Please avoid deprecated versions such as (note name change).
This library, which has received the efforts of many excellent people, is built mainly upon
cnuernber/dtype-next and the
JNA library.
Static code generation - generate clojure namespaces
wrapping python modules that are safe to use with AOT and load much faster than analogous calls. These namespace will not
automatically initialize the python subsystem -- initialize! must be called first (or a nice exception is throw).
libpython-clj features
Bridge between JVM objects and Python objects easily; use Python in your Java and
use some Java in your Python.
Python objects are linked to the JVM GC such that when they are no longer reachable
from the JVM their references are released. Scope based resource contexts are
also available.
Finding the python libraries is done dynamically allowing one system to run on multiple versions
of python.
REPL oriented design means fast, smooth, iterative development.
Carin Meier has written excellent posts on plotting and
advanced text generation. She also has some
great examples.
Vision
We aim to integrate Python into Clojure at a deep level. This means that we want to
be able to load/use python modules almost as if they were Clojure namespaces. We
also want to be able to use Clojure to extend Python objects. I gave a
talk at Clojure Conj 2019 that
outlines more of what is going on.
This code is a concrete example that generates an
embedding for faces:
Usage
Config namespace
Update project.clj
We have a document on all the features but beginning usage is
pretty simple. Import your modules, use the things from Clojure. We have put
effort into making sure things like sequences and ranges transfer between the two
languages.
Environments
One very complimentary aspect of Python with respect to Clojure is its integration
with cutting edge native libraries. Our support isn't perfect so some understanding
of the mechanism is important to diagnose errors and issues.
Current, we launch the python3 executable and print out various different bits of
configuration as json. We parse the json and use the output to attempt to find
the shared library so for example if we are loading python
3.6 we look for on Linux or on the Mac.
If we are unable to find a dynamic library such as or ,
it may be because Python is statically linked and the library is not present at all.
This is dependent on the operating system and installation, and it is not always possible to detect it.
In this case, we will receive an error message saying "Failed to find a valid python library!".
To fix this, you may need to install additional OS packages or manually set the precise library location during .
This pathway has allowed us support Conda albeit with some work. For examples
using Conda, check out the facial rec repository a)bove or look into how we
build
our test docker containers.
Community
We like to talk about libpython-clj on Zulip as the conversations are persistent and searchable.
Further Information
Clojure Conj 2019 video and
slides.
development discussion forum
design documentation
scope and garbage collection docs
examples
docker setup
pandas bindings (!!)
nextjournal notebooks
scicloj video
Clojure/Python interop technical blog post
persistent datastructures in python
New To Clojure
New to Clojure or the JVM? Try remixing the nextjournal entry and playing around
there. For more resources on learning and getting more comfortable with Clojure,
we have an introductory document.
Resources
libpython C api
create numpy from C ptr
create C ptr from numpy
To install jar to local .m2 :
Deploy to clojars
This command will sign jar before deploy, using your gpg key. (see dev/src/build.clj for signing options)
License
Copyright © 2019 Chris Nuernberger
This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
terms of the Eclipse Public License 2.0 which is available at
http://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0.
