AMQP
Simple Elixir wrapper for the Erlang RabbitMQ client.
The API is based on Langohr, a Clojure client for RabbitMQ.
Upgrading guides
To upgrade from the old version, please read our upgrade guides:
0.x to 1.x
1.x to 2.x
2.x to 3.x
Usage
Add AMQP as a dependency in your file.
Elixir will start automatically with this if you use Elixir 1.6+.
If that's not the case (use to check), try
adding to or in your . Or
call at the start.
After you are done, run in your shell to fetch and compile AMQP.
Start an interactive Elixir shell with .
Setup a consumer GenServer
Configuration
Connections and channels
You can define a connection and channel in your config and AMQP will
automatically...
Open the connection and channel at the start of the application
Automatically try to reconnect if they are disconnected
You can access the connection/channel via .
When a channel is down and reconnected, you have to make sure your consumer
subscribes to a channel again.
See the documentation for and
for more details.
Types of arguments and headers
The parameter in , ,
and the parameter in are a list of
tuples in the form , where is a binary containing
the argument/header name, is an atom describing the AMQP field type and
a term compatible with the AMQP field type.
The valid AMQP field types are:
Valid argument names in include:
"x-expires"
"x-message-ttl"
"x-dead-letter-routing-key"
"x-dead-letter-exchange"
"x-max-length"
"x-max-length-bytes"
Valid argument names in include:
"x-priority"
"x-cancel-on-ha-failover"
Valid argument names in include:
"alternate-exchange"
Troubleshooting / FAQ
Consumer stops receiving messages
It usually happens when your code doesn't send acknowledgement(ack, nack or
reject) after receiving a message.
If you use GenServer for your consumer, try storing the number of messages the
server is currently processing to the GenServer state.
If the number equals , those messages were left without
acknowledgements and that's why the consumer has stopped receiving more
messages.
Also review the following points:
- when an exception was raised how it would be handled
- when :exit signal was thrown how it would be handled
- when a message processing took long time what could happen
Also make sure that the consumer monitors the channel pid. When the channel is
gone, you have to reopen it and subscribe to a new channel again.
The version compatibility
Check out this article to find out the compatibility with Elixir, OTP and RabbitMQ.
Heartbeats
In case the connection is dropped automatically, consider enabling heartbeats.
You can set option when you open a connection.
For more details, read this article
Does the library support AMQP 1.0?
Currently the library doesn't support AMQP 1.0 and there is no plan to do so at
the moment. Our main aim here (at least for now) is to provide a thin wrapper
around amqpclient for Elixir
programmers.
Copyright and License
Copyright (c) 2014 Paulo Almeida
This library is MIT licensed. See the
LICENSE for details.
