Mutations
Compose your business logic into commands that sanitize and validate input. Write safe, reusable, and maintainable code for Ruby and Rails apps.
Installation
gem install mutations
Or add it to your Gemfile:
gem 'mutations'
Example
Some things to note about the example:
We don't need attraccessible or strongattributes to protect against mass assignment attacks
We're guaranteed that within execute, the inputs will be the correct data types, even if they needed some coercion (all strings are stripped by default, and strings like "1" / "0" are converted to true/false for newslettersubscribe)
We don't need ActiveRecord validations
We don't need callbacks on our models -- everything is in the execute method (helper methods are also encouraged)
We don't use acceptsnestedattributesfor, even though multiple ActiveRecord models are created
This code is completely re-usable in other contexts (need an API?)
The inputs to this 'function' are documented by default -- the bare minimum to use it (name and email) are documented, as are 'extras' (newslettersubscribe)
Why is it called 'mutations'?
Imagine you had a folder in your Rails project:
app/mutations
And inside, you had a library of business operations that you can do against your datastore:
app/mutations/users/signup.rb
app/mutations/users/login.rb
app/mutations/users/updateprofile.rb
app/mutations/users/changepassword.rb
...
app/mutations/articles/create.rb
app/mutations/articles/update.rb
app/mutations/articles/publish.rb
app/mutations/articles/comment.rb
...
app/mutations/ideas/upsert.rb
...
Each of these mutations takes your application from one state to the next.
That being said, you can create commands for things that don't mutate your database.
How do I call mutations?
You have two choices. Given a mutation UserSignup, you can do this:
Or, you can do this:
What can I pass to mutations?
Mutations only accept hashes as arguments to run and run!
That being said, you can pass multiple hashes to run, and they are merged together. Later hashes take precedence. This give you safety in situations where you want to pass unsafe user inputs and safe server inputs into a single mutation. For instance:
Here, we pass two hashes to CreateComment. Even if the params[:comment] hash has a user or article field, they're overwritten by the second hash. (Also note: even if they weren't, they couldn't be of the correct data type in this particular case.)
How do I define mutations?
1. Subclass Mutations::Command
2. Define your required inputs and their validations:
3. Define your optional inputs and their validations:
4. Define your execute method. It can return a value:
See a full list of options here.
How do I write an execute method?
Your execute method has access to the inputs passed into it:
If you define an input called email, then you'll have these three methods:
You can do extra validation inside of execute:
You can return a value as the result of the command:
What about validation errors?
If things don't pan out, you'll get back an Mutations::ErrorHash object that maps invalid inputs to either symbols or messages. Example:
You can add errors in a validate method if the default validations are insufficient. Errors added by validate will prevent the execute method from running.
Alternatively you can also add these validations in the execute method:
If you want to tie the validation messages into your I18n system, you'll need to write a custom error message generator.
FAQs
Is this better than the 'Rails Way'?
Rails comes with an awesome default stack, and a lot of standard practices that folks use are very reasonable (eg, thin controllers, fat models).
That being said, there's a whole slew of patterns that are available to experienced developers. As your Rails app grows in size and complexity, my experience has been that some of these patterns can help your app immensely.
How do I share code between mutations?
Write some modules that you include into multiple mutations.
Can I subclass my mutations?
Yes, but I don't think it's a very good idea. Better to compose.
Can I use this with Rails forms helpers?
Somewhat. Any form can submit to your server, and mutations will happily accept that input. However, if there are errors, there's no built-in way to bake the errors into the HTML with Rails form tag helpers. Right now this is really designed to support a JSON API. You'd probably have to write an adapter of some kind.
